[Music]
good morning welcome to breakfast with
naga manchetti and
charlie state our headlines today at
least another five weeks of lockdown
current restrictions in england
will stay and schools will remain shut
until the 8th of march
at the latest prime minister prepares to
visit scotland
amid demands for another independence
referendum but nicolas sturgeon
questions if the trip is essential the
eu and the uk-based vaccine maker
astrazeneca have vowed to work
together to resolve supply shortages
taking the plunge in the middle of a
pandemic good morning figures out today
are set to confirm 2020 was a record
year for business startups
i speak to those who dared to follow
their dream
good morning they hadn't achieved it for
nearly half a century but
sheffield united have finally gone on
one at old trafford in one of the big
shocks of the premier league season so
far
and double olympic rowing champion helen
glover tells breakfast
about her return to the sport
good morning today once again we've got
a band of heavy rain and hill snow
pushing northwards and eastwards ahead
of it northern scotland some sunshine
but cold
behind it for southern england and wales
it will brighten up and it's going to be
very mild for the time of year
i'll have all the details later in the
programme
[Music]
good morning it's thursday the 28th of
january our top story is that it will be
at least another five weeks of lockdown
for england
after boris johnson said schools will
not reopen fully to
all pupils until the 8th of march at the
earliest the prime minister
says he'll outline at the end of
february how the latest restrictions
might be eased it comes as a new study
suggests infection levels
are still very high john donaldson has
this report
for now homeschooling is here to stay
with the news from the prime minister
that schools in england will not return
to normal
for at least five more weeks we hope
it will therefore be safe to begin the
reopening of schools
from monday the 8th of march with other
economic and social restrictions being
removed
thereafter as and when the data permits
there were few specifics but later at
the downing street briefing
boris johnson did promise to present a
broader plan
for getting out of lockdown in the week
beginning the 22nd of february
we will set out our plan not just for
reopening
our schools but gradually to reopen our
economy and
our society and to get our lives back to
as close to normal as possible
but that timetable will depend on the
numbers which are mixed
the latest daily uk figures show 1725
new deaths were reported
the second highest number so far since
the pandemic struck
more than 37 000 people were in hospital
with coronavirus
over the seven days to the 25th of
january
but new cases are continuing to fall
with 25
308 new infections recorded in the
latest
24-hour period and more than 7 million
people
have now received the first dose of a
vaccine
we've certainly seen fairly dramatic
drops already in case numbers
hospitalizations new hospitalizations
are
uh declining uh quite
rapidly now and i think we're going to
see
the death rate as well starting to
decline it's certainly
plateaued and has started to differ fast
so
hopefully we're past the worst
much will depend on the continued
vaccine rollout
but after more than a hundred thousand
deaths
and with hospitals still stretched any
sense of optimism
can only be cautious john donaldson
bbc news the prime minister will visit
scotland later where he's expected to
stress the benefits of uk wide
during the pandemic however the trip has
been met with criticism from scotland's
first minister nicola sturgeon
who's questioned whether it's an
essential journey our political
correspondent nick earley has the story
this is boris johnson visiting nicola
sturgeon in 2019
just after he became prime minister but
they won't be shaking hands today
with travel banned ms sturgeon has
questioned whether the visit is
essential
downing street says it is
the prime minister intends to make the
case for scotland remaining in the uk
he believes the pandemic shows the
benefits of cooperation
pointing to funding for public services
the uk wide furlough scheme
and the vaccine bought by the uk
government then distributed by the
scottish government
the snp though say the government in
london is panicking
a series of polls over the last six
months suggest support for independence
is now higher
than support for the uk when scotland
goes to the polls in may
the snp will put independence front and
center
if they win which looks likely they'll
demand another referendum
london plans to say no but the debate
over independence
isn't going away and some believe that
blocking another referendum
will only make it more popular nick
hardly bbc news
astrozenica bosses have met with eu
officials to try to resolve their
dispute over a shortage
of the oxford vaccine the eu is
demanding that tens of millions of doses
produced in the uk
should be diverted to the rest of europe
mark labelle has more
the eu's rollout of the oxford
astrazeneca vaccine it hopes to approve
on friday
is already in doubt the block is fuming
after suggestions it may only get around
a third of what it expects
pharmaceutical companies vaccine
developers
have moral societal and contractual
responsibilities
which they need to uphold astrazeneca
has reported production delays
in the netherlands and belgium the eu
says these unaffected production sites
in the uk
should provide the shortfall the uk
factories are part of our advanced
purchase agreements
and this is why they have to deliver but
astrazeneca has other customers too
including the uk they could be affected
in a tit-for-tat threat
dubbed vaccine nationalism if the eu
restricts
exports of other vaccines made within
the block to deal with the shortfall
we're very confident in our supplies
we're very confident in our
in our contracts and we're going ahead
uh on that basis
astrazeneca denies eu claims it's
backtracking on its commitments in order
to sell its vaccines for profit
elsewhere
but as this bitter row grows the eu
wants its contract with astrazeneca
which the pharmaceutical company says
was signed three months after the uk
agreed theirs
to be made public it may be that it's
that the uk has got favorable
contractual terms and actually
you know has benefited from being first
in line
and actually the eu has more of a
as we've heard a sort of reasonable
endeavors clause in the contract
on the part of astrazeneca such that
it's not in such
a tight contractual mechanism but as eu
countries suffer delays with other
vaccines
the eu's health commissioner says this
current row should not come down to
first
come first serve saying that logic may
work in the butcher's shop
but not for these advanced purchase
agreements
mark lobel bbc news
a team of world health organization
investigators is set to begin looking
into the origins of the coronavirus
pandemic in china after a number of
delays
the scientists have now finished their
quarantine in the central city of wuhan
where the first cases were detected more
than
a year ago however their movements will
still be restricted
due to extra virus prevention measures
social workers are braced for a tsunami
of needs as the uk recovers from the
pandemic this is according to a union
a survey by the british association of
social workers
suggests that three-quarters of its
members feel the restrictions have
affected their ability to provide
vulnerable
to protect vulnerable children and
adults our world's correspondent thomas
morgan has more
for the majority of social workers
across the uk
caseloads were already close were
already full
before the pandemic started and as
restrictions eased
there came a flood of new cases it just
feels like we're kind of
cementing over the cracks but not
actually getting to the foundation of
what's really going on
minnie jackson which isn't her real name
is a social worker
that deals with children she has real
concerns at a higher workload coupled
with social distancing measures
than means that face-to-face visits are
now few and far between
could be having a knock-on effect on her
work i think there's that constant
worry that am i missing something is
there something here that i'm not seeing
and how can i actually do the meaningful
work through a
computer screen or through a mobile
phone a special survey released today by
baswa union
has looked at the effect the pandemic
has had on social workers
over two-thirds of members working with
children said
that referrals or their caseload had
increased after schools returned
after lockdown last year and the union
fears that the workload may increase
again after these later set of
restrictions are eased
and over quarters of members had said
that lockdown restrictions
had increased their concerns about
social workers capacity
to both safeguard and protect children
and adults
our fear is that that you know there is
going to be an absolute you know
tsunami of need which will um
translate into you know in increased
referral and
increased demand on the profession the
devolved governments across the four
nations have said that social work
is a priority for them that workers have
played a crucial role in helping
communities in difficult circumstances
and that there will be investment for
further staffing in the future
but for many and colleagues who work to
help the most vulnerable in our society
may take some time to heal thomas
mulligan bbc news
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app
and get the full story with bbc dot co
dot uk
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with bbc news